Relational Model

Date and time stored together, when needed separately just format the result

List of attributes, equivalent to domain of a class
   Set of atomic values

The attribute itself is the name of a column

Tuple is equivalent to a record

Relational schema consists of relational name and attribute name

r(R) means relation instance (r) of the relation schema (R) 

attribute(R) -> set of attributes
degree(R) -> number of attributes
number(r) -> number of attributes in the relation instance

Read chapter 9, 6, and 3

Next Thursday's lab will be on relational algebra, covered in chapter 6. 

Each relation is a set with no duplicate tuples. Don't assume that records in the set are sorted by default.

t0,1 t[1,2,3] return the 1,2,3 values for the 0 and 1 record in t
t.EID refers to employee id for record t 
think of the dot as a member access operator from c++

1-tuple, 2-tuple, n-tuple - n describes the number of attributes in the tuple

Important to get the order of stored attributes correct. Changing the order later is difficult because you have to shift all the records in that relation.

Entity  constraint - no record can be inserted without a primary key.

Referential constraint (foreign key constraint) - records in a relation set must contain the primary keys from its referenced relations, no null values can be accepted as input for foreign keys. 

If any of the attributes in the referenced relation's primary keys are null, the record will be rejected with an error. 

All referenced records must have their referring records deleted before the referenced records can be deleted. Cascading deletions delete all referencing records when the referenced record is deleted.

Updates are similar to deletions and require either cascading updates, or no changes to the referenced records.

Value-range constraint: the set of acceptable values for attributes. Defines upper and lower bounds of acceptable input.

Transaction is a group of statements that are executed as a whole. 

Chapter Nine Notes
Composite and multiple values need to be converted when mving to relational model

Build new table that consists of columns named for the different values in the muliple valued attribute

Can break down composite attributes into multiple simple attributes






